README.md, before:

# knlp: Kernel-Style Machine Learning

**Rapid prototyping and automation for open source ML R&D**

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://xkcd.com/974/">
    <img src="https://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/the_general_problem.png" alt="XKCD: The General Problem" width="400">
  </a>
  <br>
  <em>Our approach to ML automation and the general problem</em>
</p>

Applying Linux kernel development methodologies to machine learning research for rapid iteration and reproducible experimentation. Kconfig-driven configuration, defconfig presets, Makefile automation, and rigorous test matrices enable fast prototyping of transformer architectures, pruning algorithms, and optimization techniques while maintaining reproducibility and collaboration at scale.

> **⚡ KVSplice**: FIM-guided selective compression achieves **25% better perplexity** (63 vs 84 PPL) and **+7 points HellaSwag** compared to naive compression by protecting high-trace early layers. 7.2x total KV cache compression on B200x4.
>
> **⚡ Reciprocal Attention**: Learned Q@K.T ↔ K@Q.T alternation achieves **5% better perplexity** and **+2 points HellaSwag** via flatter optimization geometry. Applied to middle layers based on FIM trace analysis. B200x4.
>
> **⚡ Adam State-Based Pruning**: bitter7 achieves **15.6% better perplexity** than magnitude baseline (37.28 vs 44.15 PPL), validating that Adam's gradient statistics enable superior pruning decisions. B200 with torch.compile.

## Development Philosophy

knlp applies **Linux kernel development practices** to machine learning research:

- **Kconfig-based configuration**: Hierarchical menus for experiment management (like `make menuconfig`)
- **Defconfig presets**: Reproducible configurations for different hardware and research goals
- **Makefile-driven builds**: Consistent build and test workflows across models
- **Documented decisions**: Every architectural choice explained in `docs/`
- **Collaborative contributions**: Community-driven ideas and ablation studies
- **Rigorous validation**: Automated test matrices before merging experiments

This methodology enables rapid iteration on transformer architectures and state-based optimization while maintaining reproducibility and rigor.

## Key Results

All results on GPT-2 124M with FineWebEdu dataset on NVIDIA B200x4.

### KVSplice: FIM-Guided KV Cache Compression

FIM (Fisher Information Matrix) trace analysis reveals early layers do critical
representational work (high trace) while late layers are safe compression targets
(low trace). KVSplice applies learned compression selectively based on this insight.

| Architecture | Val PPL | HellaSwag | KV Cache | Description |
|--------------|---------|-----------|----------|-------------|
| MLA+KVSplice (all) | 83.85 | 24% | 3 MB | Naive 12x compression |
| **MLA+KVSplice FIM** | **63.08** | **31%** | 5 MB | FIM-guided 7.2x compression |

![KVSplice FIM Results](docs/kvsplice/kvsplice_fim_combined.png)
*FIM-guided selective compression (green) achieves 25% better perplexity and
+7 points HellaSwag by protecting high-trace early layers from compression.*

See [docs/kvsplice/README.md](docs/kvsplice/README.md) for architecture details,
FIM analysis methodology, and memory savings calculations.

---

### Reciprocal Attention: Learned Bidirectional Attention Flow

Reciprocal Attention alternates between Q@K.T (standard) and K@Q.T (reciprocal)
attention patterns. FIM analysis shows middle layers benefit most from this
bidirectional flow while early layers should remain unmodified.

| Architecture | Val PPL | HellaSwag | Speed | Description |
|--------------|---------|-----------|-------|-------------|
| Baseline GPT-2 | 72.5 | 28% | 285ms | Standard attention |
| SDPA Gate (Qwen3) | 71.8 | 28.5% | 295ms | Output gating only |
| **RA (middle layers)** | **68.9** | **30%** | 320ms | Reciprocal attention |

![RA Quality Comparison](docs/images/ra_quality_comparison.png)
*Reciprocal Attention (green) outperforms baseline and Qwen3-style gating
with 5% better perplexity and +2 points HellaSwag at 12% speed cost.*

See [docs/ra.md](docs/ra.md) for layer strategy, FIM trace justification,
and comparison with Qwen3 SDPA gating.

---

### Adam State-Based Pruning: Hypothesis Validated

Adam's accumulated gradient statistics enable superior pruning decisions
compared to magnitude-based approaches. State-based variants significantly
outperform magnitude pruning baseline with identical hyperparameters.

| Model | Sparsity | Perplexity | Improvement | Method |
|-------|----------|------------|-------------|--------|
| GPT-2 | 50% | 44.15 | baseline | Movement pruning |
| GPT-2 | 50% | 40.94 | +7.3% | bitter8 (state-based) |
| GPT-2 | 50% | **37.28** | **+15.6%** | **bitter7 (variance)** |

![AdamWPrune Comparison](images/adamwprune_fair_comparison.png)
*State-based pruning outperforms magnitude baseline with identical
hyperparameters. bitter7 achieves 37.28 PPL (15.6% better) than
movement pruning baseline (44.15 PPL).*

See [docs/pruning.md](docs/pruning.md) for complete pruning research,
ResNet results, and the bitter7 evolution story.

---

## Research Areas

knlp serves as a collaborative platform for ML architecture research:

- **[AdamWPrune](docs/pruning.md)**: State-based pruning leveraging Adam optimizer state variables for zero-overhead pruning decisions during training
- **[Reciprocal Attention](docs/ra.md)**: Learned alternation between Q@K.T and K@Q.T attention patterns for 5% better perplexity via flatter optimization geometry (12% speed cost)
- **[KVSplice](docs/kvsplice/README.md)**: FIM-guided KV cache compression achieving 7.2x compression with 25% better quality than naive compression by protecting high-trace early layers
- **[Weight Tying](docs/weight-tying.md)**: Parameter reduction through strategic sharing
- **[KV Tying](docs/kv-tying.md)**: Attention projection parameter reduction
- **[Mechanistic Interpretability](docs/mechint.md)**: Post-training circuit analysis

See [docs/architecture.md](docs/architecture.md) for details on the kernel-inspired infrastructure.

## Getting Started

### System Requirements

For systems using `torch.compile()`, Python development headers are required:

```bash
# Ubuntu/Debian
sudo apt-get install python3-dev

# RHEL/CentOS/Fedora
sudo yum install python3-devel
```

### Installation

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
wandb login # optional
```

### Run Your First Experiment

```bash
make defconfig-gpt2-vanilla-baseline
make
```

That's it! The experiment will run and save results automatically.

See [docs/quickstart.md](docs/quickstart.md) for detailed workflow and
advanced options. See [docs/tracker.md](docs/tracker.md) for experiment
tracking with WandB or Trackio.

## Contributing

knlp welcomes contributions following Linux kernel development practices:

### Proposing Ideas
1. **Open an issue** with your research idea or architectural proposal
2. **Provide motivation**: Why this approach might work better
3. **Reference prior work**: Links to papers or existing implementations
4. **Suggest ablation**: How to test your hypothesis

### Submitting Code
1. **Create defconfig**: Add `defconfigs/<model>-<your-feature>`
2. **Document thoroughly**: Add or update `docs/<feature>.md`
3. **Run dry-run**: `make check` to validate architecture
4. **Test ablation**: Run comparison vs baseline
5. **Submit PR**: With results, graphs, and documentation

### Code Style
- **Python**: Follow existing style (black formatter)
- **Kconfig**: Use kernel-style help text
- **Commit messages**: Terse, technical, with "Generated-by" tags
- **Documentation**: See `docs/*.md` for style examples

### Current Contributors
Ideas, architectures, and validation from:
- Luis Chamberlain (maintainer)
- Community contributors (ablation suggestions, architectural ideas)

## Citation

If you use this work, please cite:

```bibtex
@misc{knlp2025,
  title        = {knlp: Kernel-Style Machine Learning - Transformer Architecture Research},
  author       = {Luis Chamberlain and contributors},
  year         = {2025},
  howpublished = {\url{https://github.com/mcgrof/knlp}},
  note         = {Collaborative ML research using Linux kernel development workflows}
}
```

## License

This project is licensed under the **MIT License**.

- **Code**: MIT license
- **Models**: AI models generated by this project can be licensed as you choose
- **Documentation**: CC-BY-SA 4.0 (collaborative, share-alike)

The project previously included GPLv2-licensed C-based Kconfig tools from the Linux kernel. These have been replaced with the Python-based `kconfiglib` library (ISC/Apache 2.0), enabling full MIT licensing for the entire project.

See LICENSE for details.

## Acknowledgments

This project draws inspiration from:
- **Linux kernel development**: Kconfig, defconfigs, Makefile patterns, rigorous testing
- **Andrej Karpathy's nanoGPT**: Clean implementation style, educational focus
- **Community contributors**: Ablation study ideas, architectural suggestions, validation testing

The kernel-style workflow enables collaborative ML research with the rigor and reproducibility of systems programming.

Commit message:

docs: clarify KVSplice compression relative to MLA baseline
Updated language to clarify that FIM-guided KVSplice adds ~20% extra
compression on top of MLA's 6x (7.2x vs 6x total), shrinking MLA's
KV cache by an additional 17% (6 MB to 5 MB at 1024 tokens).

This framing makes clear that KVSplice builds on MLA rather than
replacing it, and quantifies the incremental benefit of FIM-guided
selective compression over the MLA baseline.

Generated-by: Claude AI
Signed-off-by: Luis Chamberlain <mcgrof@kernel.org>

README.md, after:

# knlp: Kernel-Style Machine Learning

**Rapid prototyping and automation for open source ML R&D**

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://xkcd.com/974/">
    <img src="https://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/the_general_problem.png" alt="XKCD: The General Problem" width="400">
  </a>
  <br>
  <em>Our approach to ML automation and the general problem</em>
</p>

Applying Linux kernel development methodologies to machine learning research for rapid iteration and reproducible experimentation. Kconfig-driven configuration, defconfig presets, Makefile automation, and rigorous test matrices enable fast prototyping of transformer architectures, pruning algorithms, and optimization techniques while maintaining reproducibility and collaboration at scale.

> **⚡ KVSplice**: FIM-guided compression adds **~20% extra compression on top of MLA** (7.2x vs 6x), shrinking MLA's KV cache by 17% while achieving **25% better perplexity** and **+7 HellaSwag** vs naive compression. B200x4.
>
> **⚡ Reciprocal Attention**: Learned Q@K.T ↔ K@Q.T alternation achieves **5% better perplexity** and **+2 points HellaSwag** via flatter optimization geometry. Applied to middle layers based on FIM trace analysis. B200x4.
>
> **⚡ Adam State-Based Pruning**: bitter7 achieves **15.6% better perplexity** than magnitude baseline (37.28 vs 44.15 PPL), validating that Adam's gradient statistics enable superior pruning decisions. B200 with torch.compile.

## Development Philosophy

knlp applies **Linux kernel development practices** to machine learning research:

- **Kconfig-based configuration**: Hierarchical menus for experiment management (like `make menuconfig`)
- **Defconfig presets**: Reproducible configurations for different hardware and research goals
- **Makefile-driven builds**: Consistent build and test workflows across models
- **Documented decisions**: Every architectural choice explained in `docs/`
- **Collaborative contributions**: Community-driven ideas and ablation studies
- **Rigorous validation**: Automated test matrices before merging experiments

This methodology enables rapid iteration on transformer architectures and state-based optimization while maintaining reproducibility and rigor.

## Key Results

All results on GPT-2 124M with FineWebEdu dataset on NVIDIA B200x4.

### KVSplice: FIM-Guided KV Cache Compression

MLA (Multi-head Latent Attention) provides 6x KV cache compression. FIM-guided
KVSplice adds ~20% extra compression on top of MLA (7.2x total), shrinking the
MLA cache by an additional 17% (6 MB → 5 MB at 1024 tokens). FIM trace analysis
guides which layers to compress: early layers (high trace) are protected while
late layers (low trace) are safe compression targets.

| Architecture | Val PPL | HellaSwag | KV Cache | Compression |
|--------------|---------|-----------|----------|-------------|
| MLA only | - | - | 6 MB | 6x baseline |
| MLA+KVSplice (all) | 83.85 | 24% | 3 MB | 12x (naive) |
| **MLA+KVSplice FIM** | **63.08** | **31%** | 5 MB | 7.2x (+20% over MLA) |

![KVSplice FIM Results](docs/kvsplice/kvsplice_fim_combined.png)
*FIM-guided selective compression (green) achieves 25% better perplexity and
+7 points HellaSwag by protecting high-trace early layers from compression.*

See [docs/kvsplice/README.md](docs/kvsplice/README.md) for architecture details,
FIM analysis methodology, and memory savings calculations.

---

### Reciprocal Attention: Learned Bidirectional Attention Flow

Reciprocal Attention alternates between Q@K.T (standard) and K@Q.T (reciprocal)
attention patterns. FIM analysis shows middle layers benefit most from this
bidirectional flow while early layers should remain unmodified.

| Architecture | Val PPL | HellaSwag | Speed | Description |
|--------------|---------|-----------|-------|-------------|
| Baseline GPT-2 | 72.5 | 28% | 285ms | Standard attention |
| SDPA Gate (Qwen3) | 71.8 | 28.5% | 295ms | Output gating only |
| **RA (middle layers)** | **68.9** | **30%** | 320ms | Reciprocal attention |

![RA Quality Comparison](docs/images/ra_quality_comparison.png)
*Reciprocal Attention (green) outperforms baseline and Qwen3-style gating
with 5% better perplexity and +2 points HellaSwag at 12% speed cost.*

See [docs/ra.md](docs/ra.md) for layer strategy, FIM trace justification,
and comparison with Qwen3 SDPA gating.

---

### Adam State-Based Pruning: Hypothesis Validated

Adam's accumulated gradient statistics enable superior pruning decisions
compared to magnitude-based approaches. State-based variants significantly
outperform magnitude pruning baseline with identical hyperparameters.

| Model | Sparsity | Perplexity | Improvement | Method |
|-------|----------|------------|-------------|--------|
| GPT-2 | 50% | 44.15 | baseline | Movement pruning |
| GPT-2 | 50% | 40.94 | +7.3% | bitter8 (state-based) |
| GPT-2 | 50% | **37.28** | **+15.6%** | **bitter7 (variance)** |

![AdamWPrune Comparison](images/adamwprune_fair_comparison.png)
*State-based pruning outperforms magnitude baseline with identical
hyperparameters. bitter7 achieves 37.28 PPL (15.6% better) than
movement pruning baseline (44.15 PPL).*

See [docs/pruning.md](docs/pruning.md) for complete pruning research,
ResNet results, and the bitter7 evolution story.

---

## Research Areas

knlp serves as a collaborative platform for ML architecture research:

- **[AdamWPrune](docs/pruning.md)**: State-based pruning leveraging Adam optimizer state variables for zero-overhead pruning decisions during training
- **[Reciprocal Attention](docs/ra.md)**: Learned alternation between Q@K.T and K@Q.T attention patterns for 5% better perplexity via flatter optimization geometry (12% speed cost)
- **[KVSplice](docs/kvsplice/README.md)**: FIM-guided compression adds ~20% on top of MLA (7.2x vs 6x), shrinking MLA's cache by 17% with 25% better quality than naive compression
- **[Weight Tying](docs/weight-tying.md)**: Parameter reduction through strategic sharing
- **[KV Tying](docs/kv-tying.md)**: Attention projection parameter reduction
- **[Mechanistic Interpretability](docs/mechint.md)**: Post-training circuit analysis

See [docs/architecture.md](docs/architecture.md) for details on the kernel-inspired infrastructure.

## Getting Started

### System Requirements

For systems using `torch.compile()`, Python development headers are required:

```bash
# Ubuntu/Debian
sudo apt-get install python3-dev

# RHEL/CentOS/Fedora
sudo yum install python3-devel
```

### Installation

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
wandb login # optional
```

### Run Your First Experiment

```bash
make defconfig-gpt2-vanilla-baseline
make
```

That's it! The experiment will run and save results automatically.

See [docs/quickstart.md](docs/quickstart.md) for detailed workflow and
advanced options. See [docs/tracker.md](docs/tracker.md) for experiment
tracking with WandB or Trackio.

## Contributing

knlp welcomes contributions following Linux kernel development practices:

### Proposing Ideas
1. **Open an issue** with your research idea or architectural proposal
2. **Provide motivation**: Why this approach might work better
3. **Reference prior work**: Links to papers or existing implementations
4. **Suggest ablation**: How to test your hypothesis

### Submitting Code
1. **Create defconfig**: Add `defconfigs/<model>-<your-feature>`
2. **Document thoroughly**: Add or update `docs/<feature>.md`
3. **Run dry-run**: `make check` to validate architecture
4. **Test ablation**: Run comparison vs baseline
5. **Submit PR**: With results, graphs, and documentation

### Code Style
- **Python**: Follow existing style (black formatter)
- **Kconfig**: Use kernel-style help text
- **Commit messages**: Terse, technical, with "Generated-by" tags
- **Documentation**: See `docs/*.md` for style examples

### Current Contributors
Ideas, architectures, and validation from:
- Luis Chamberlain (maintainer)
- Community contributors (ablation suggestions, architectural ideas)

## Citation

If you use this work, please cite:

```bibtex
@misc{knlp2025,
  title        = {knlp: Kernel-Style Machine Learning - Transformer Architecture Research},
  author       = {Luis Chamberlain and contributors},
  year         = {2025},
  howpublished = {\url{https://github.com/mcgrof/knlp}},
  note         = {Collaborative ML research using Linux kernel development workflows}
}
```

## License

This project is licensed under the **MIT License**.

- **Code**: MIT license
- **Models**: AI models generated by this project can be licensed as you choose
- **Documentation**: CC-BY-SA 4.0 (collaborative, share-alike)

The project previously included GPLv2-licensed C-based Kconfig tools from the Linux kernel. These have been replaced with the Python-based `kconfiglib` library (ISC/Apache 2.0), enabling full MIT licensing for the entire project.

See LICENSE for details.

## Acknowledgments

This project draws inspiration from:
- **Linux kernel development**: Kconfig, defconfigs, Makefile patterns, rigorous testing
- **Andrej Karpathy's nanoGPT**: Clean implementation style, educational focus
- **Community contributors**: Ablation study ideas, architectural suggestions, validation testing

The kernel-style workflow enables collaborative ML research with the rigor and reproducibility of systems programming.
